## Abstract {.page_break_before}

READ THREAD ABOUT ABSTRACT BY AN EDITOR. See Slack, sent by Casey.

Correlation coefficients are used across different research areas to identify intriguing relationships or answer critical questions.
In transcriptomics, knowing that genes have correlated expression can suggest that they share functions or are part of networks that influence different traits.
However, the strategies to detect these gene-gene connections are usually deployed with linear correlation coefficients, which are not well suited to discovering more complex, non-linear patterns.
Here we introduce the Clustermatch Correlation Coefficient (CCC), an efficient, easy-to-use and not-only-linear coefficient based on machine learning models.
CCC efficiently derives a similarity value between features by applying clustering algorithms and automatically adjusting the model complexity to find general patterns in data.
Applying CCC to human gene expression data in GTEx reveals both linear and biologically meaningful non-linear gene-gene relationships.
We found that CCC is robust to outliers, it does not miss important linear relationships, and can find more complex patterns associated with sex as a biological variable not captured by linear-only coefficients.
Gene pairs highly ranked by CCC in expression data alone showed high probabilities of interaction in tissue-specific networks built from protein-interaction data, transcription factor regulation, and chemical and genetic perturbations.
Results suggest that CCC will improve the detection of crucial molecular patterns not captured by standard, linear-only coefficients.
Our method is highly parallelizable and much more efficient than other state-of-the-art, non-linear methods such as the Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC), making it a practical solution to genome-scale data.
CCC is an efficient next-generation correlation coefficient that can be readily applied in a broad range of different domains.
