### Replication of gene associations using tissue-specific gene networks from GIANT

We analyzed the other gene pairs in Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs b to assess whether associations were replicated in other datasets besides GTEx.
This is challenging and prone to bias because linear-only correlation coefficients are usually used in gene co-expression analyses.
We used 144 tissue-specific gene networks from the Genome-wide Analysis of gene Networks in Tissues (GIANT) [@pmcid:PMC4828725; @url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org], where nodes represent genes and each edge a functional relationship weighted with a probability of interaction between two genes (see [Methods](#sec:giant)).
Importantly, the version of GIANT used in this study did not include GTEx samples [@url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org/data], making it an ideal case for replication.
These networks were built from expression and different interaction measurements, including gene co-expression (using Pearson correlation after several preprocessing steps), protein-interaction, transcription factor regulation, and chemical/genetic perturbations and microRNA target profiles from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB [@pmid:16199517]).
We reasoned that our highly-ranked gene pairs using three different coefficients in a single tissue (whole blood in GTEx, Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs b) should replicate across the multi-tissue, multi-cell type functional interaction networks in GIANT.
First, for each pair in Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs b for which genes were present in GIANT models (this excluded *AC068580.6* - *KLHL21*, which we comment below), we ran the tissue-specific interaction analysis selecting "blood", which was the most equivalent to whole blood in GTEx.
The predicted blood-specific networks for each of these six gene pairs is shown in Figure @fig:giant_gene_pairs:blood.
Two large black nodes in each network's top-left and bottom-right corners represent our gene pairs.
A green edge means a close-to-zero probability of interaction, whereas a red edge represents a strong predicted relationship between two genes.

![
**Predicted blood-specific networks from GIANT for six gene pairs prioritized by correlation coefficients.**
A node represents a gene, and an edge the probability that two genes are part of the same biological process in blood.
A maximum of 15 genes are shown for each subfigure.
The GIANT web application automatically determined a minimum interaction confidence (edges' weights) to be shown.
All these analyses can be performed online using the following links:
*IFNG* - *SDS* [@url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org/gene/10993+3458],
*JUN* - *APOC1* [@url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org/gene/3725+341],
*ZDHHC12* - *CCL18* [@url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org/gene/6362+84885],
*RASSF2* - *CYTIP* [@url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org/gene/9770+9595],
*MYOZ1* - *TNNI2* [@url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org/gene/58529+7136],
*PYGM* - *TPM2* [@url:https://hb.flatironinstitute.org/gene/5837+7169].
The GIANT web-server was accessed on April 4, 2022.
](images/coefs_comp/giant_networks/blood_tissues/main.svg "GIANT network interaction"){#fig:giant_gene_pairs:blood width="100%"}

In general, gene pairs highly ranked by CCC were part of more cohesive networks compared with Pearson and Spearman.
For example, the average probability of *IFNG* and *SDS* with other genes in the network was 0.42 and 0.29, respectively (Supplementary Table @tbl:giant:weights).
A similar pattern was found for *JUN* and *APOC1*, where the interaction probability was 0.68 and 0.47, respectively.
The evidence of interaction between *ZDHHC12* and *CCL18* was less evident, with interaction averages of 0.07 and 0.79, respectively.
For this gene pair, a dense network was connected with *CCL18*, although the predicted interaction of *ZDHHC12* with this potential process was weak.
*RASSF2* and *CYTIP*, with a high CCC value ($c=0.20$) and low Pearson and Spearman ($p=0.16$ and $s=0.11$), were both strongly connected to the network, with interaction scores of at least 0.63 for both and an average of 0.75 and 0.84, respectively.
The predicted networks for the two gene pairs exclusively prioritized by Pearson were much less cohesive.
*MYOZ1* and *TNNI2* had low average interaction scores of 0.17 and 0.22 with the rest of the genes.
On the other hand, the average interaction probability of *PYGM* with the network was very low (0.04), where only *TPM2* showed a strong connection to the network.
This lack of replication for these two gene pairs in GIANT suggests that their high Pearson value in GTEx is driven by outliers (Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs b).


We also assessed whether top gene pairs detected in whole blood from GTEx had evidence of being specifically expressed in blood cell lineages.
For this, we let GIANT automatically predict a relevant tissue- or cell type-specific network (see [Methods](#sec:giant)).
All six gene pairs prioritized by CCC were predicted to be specific to a blood-relevant cell lineage (Supplementary Figure @fig:giant_gene_pairs:pred_tissue): natural killer cells, mononuclear phagocytes, macrophages and leukocytes.
Additionally, the interaction of these gene pairs with the cell lineage-specific networks improved over the blood-specific network (Supplementary Table @tbl:giant:weights).
Conversely, the top two Pearson gene pairs were predicted to be specific to skeletal muscle, and their interaction decreased.
To confirm whether these patterns were globally present, we performed a systematic evaluation using the top 100 gene pairs from each intersection where CCC disagrees with Pearson and Spearman.
We automatically predicted a relevant tissue or cell type network for each gene pair using GIANT.
Then, we took the top 5 more common predicted tissues/cell types in each coefficient intersection (shown in Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs a).
The results are in Figure @fig:giant_gene_pairs:top, where each row shows
1) the number of gene pairs predicted to be specific to a tissue/cell type (bar plot on the left) and
2) the average probability of gene interaction in each tissue-specific network (box plot on the right).

![
**Summary of predicted tissue/cell type networks for gene pairs exclusively prioritized by CCC and Pearson.**
The first row combines all gene pairs where CCC is high and Pearson or Spearman are low.
The second row combines all gene pairs where Pearson is high and CCC or Spearman are low.
Bar plots (left) show the number of gene pairs for each predicted tissue/cell type.
Box plots (right) show the average probability of interaction between genes in these predicted tissue-specific networks.
](images/coefs_comp/giant_networks/top_gene_pairs-main.svg "GIANT network interaction on gene pairs"){#fig:giant_gene_pairs:top width="100%"}

Notably, most gene pairs highly prioritized by CCC and not by the rest were predicted to be strongly blood-specific (indicated with red bars/boxes), including several cell lineages in this tissue like natural killer cells, macrophages, and other leukocytes.
The average probability of interaction between genes in these CCC-ranked networks was also very high, with all medians close to 75% and first quartiles above 40%.
In contrast, most Pearson's gene pairs were predicted to be specific to tissues unrelated to blood.
The probabilities of interaction in these Pearson-ranked networks were also generally lower than in CCC, except for blood-specific gene pairs.
The gene-gene relationships exclusively detected by CCC in whole blood from GTEx were replicated in more sophisticated network models trained without GTEx.
These results suggest that CCC can disentangle intricated cell lineage-specific transcriptional patterns missed by linear-only coefficients.
