### Computational complexity of coefficients {#sec:time_test}

We also compared CCC with the other coefficients in terms of computational complexity.
Although CCC and MIC might identify similar gene pairs in gene expression data, the use of MIC in large datasets remains limited due to its very long computation time, despite some methodological/implementation improvements [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts707; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0157567; @doi:10.4137/EBO.S13121; @doi:10.1038/srep06662; @doi:10.1098/rsos.201424].
The original MIC implementation uses ApproxMaxMI, a computationally demanding heuristic estimator [@doi:10.1126/science.1205438].
Recently, a more efficient implementation called MIC<sub>e</sub> was proposed [@Reshef2016].
These two MIC estimators are provided by the `minepy` package [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts707], a C implementation available for Python.
We compared all these coefficients in terms of computation time on randomly generated variables of different sizes, which simulates a scenario of gene expression data with different numbers of conditions.
Differently from the rest, CCC allows us to easily parallelize the computation of a single gene pair (see [Methods](#sec:ccc_algo)), so we also tested the cases using 1 and 3 CPU cores.
Figure @fig:time_test shows the time in seconds in log scale.

![
**Computational complexity of all correlation coefficients on simulated data.**
We simulated variables/features with varying data sizes (from 100 to a million, $x$-axis).
The plot shows the average time in seconds (log-scale) taken for each coefficient on ten repetitions (1000 repetitions were performed for data size 100).
CCC was run using 1 and 3 CPU cores.
MIC and MIC<sub>e</sub> did not finish running in a reasonable amount of time for data sizes of 10,000 and 100,000, respectively.
](images/coefs_comp/time_test/time_test-main.svg "Computation time"){#fig:time_test width="55%"}

As we already expected, Pearson and Spearman were the fastest, given that they only need to compute basic summary statistics from the data.
For example, Pearson is three orders of magnitude faster than CCC.
Among the nonlinear coefficients, CCC was faster than the two MIC variations (up to two orders of magnitude), with the only exception in very small data sizes.
The difference is important because both MIC variants were implemented in C [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts707], a high-performance programming language, whereas CCC was implemented in Python (optimized with `numba`).
For a data size of a million, the multi-core CCC was twice as fast as the single-core CCC.
This suggests that new implementations using more advanced processing units (such as GPUs) are feasible and could make CCC reach speeds closer to Pearson.
