### Clustermatch and Maximal Information Coefficient strongly agree on gene pair prioritization


![
**Distribution of Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC) and comparison with other methods.**
Given the high time complexity of MIC, approximately 1% of gene pairs were sampled from our previous set of 5,000 genes (GTEx v8, whole blood).
**a)** Histogram of coefficient values.
**b)** Corresponding cumulative histogram. The dotted line maps the coefficient value that accumulates 70% of gene pairs.
**c)** 2D histogram plot with hexagonal bins between all coefficients, where a logarithmic scale was used to color each hexagon.
](images/coefs_comp/gtex_whole_blood/mic/dist-main.svg "Distribution of MIC values"){#fig:dist_coefs_mic width="100%"}


Finally, we compared all the coefficients with the Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC [@pmid:22174245]), a popular nonlinear method that can find complex relationships in data, although very expensive in computational terms.
To circumvent this limitation of MIC, we took a small random sample of 100,000 gene pairs from all possible pairwise comparisons of our 5,000 highly variable genes from whole blood in GTEx v8.
Then we performed the same analysis on the distribution of coefficients, shown in Figure @fig:dist_coefs_mic.
We verified that Clustermatch and MIC behave similarly in this dataset, with essentially the same distribution but only shifted.
Figure @fig:dist_coefs_mic c shows that these two coefficients relate almost linearly and compare very similarly with Pearson and Spearman.
This result is relevant because MIC represented an important step in correlation analysis research, and it has been successfully used in various application domains [@pmid:33972855; @pmid:33001806; @pmid:27006077].
However, the use of MIC in large datasets remains limited due to its very long computation time.
Our work and analyses suggest that Clustermatch could be an equally effective but much more efficient next-generation correlation coefficient.
